APPLAUSE
CHEERING AND APPLAUSE
ii
It has become a wonderful moment
every week across the nation. A huge
round of applause for all of our
carers and key workers, working so
Welcome to Question Time. On the
panel, Robert Bucklin, Secretary of
State for
State forJustice, previously
Solicitor General. Labour’s newly
Solicitor General. labour’s newly
appointed
Solicitor General. Labour’s newly
appointed Foreign Secretary. And
joining us from home, Lisa Nandy.
joining us from home, Lisa Mandy.
Karan
joining us from home, Lisa Nandy.
Karan Bilimoria ra, crossbench life
peer and vice president of the CBI.
And a Doctor Who specialises in
And a Doctor who specialises in
palliative
And a Doctor Who specialises in
palliative care working full—time on
palliative rare working full-time on
the front
palliative care working full—time on
the front line and author of Dear
Life, Dying
the front line and author of Deer
Life, Dying With Dignity. Dr Rachel
Life, Dying with Dignity. Dr Rachel
Clarke.
Life, Dying With Dignity. Dr Rachel
Clarke. That evening and welcome to
my guests. And Lisa who is
my guests. And Lisa who isjoining
my guests. And Lisa who is joining
us from wigan.
my guests. And Lisa who isjoining
us from Wigan. As you know, we have
us from wigan. As you know, we have
no studio
us from Wigan. As you know, we have
no studio audience, which is a
pretty strange feeling. But this
week’s pre—recorded questions comes
week’s pre-recorded questions comes
from
week’s pre—recorded questions comes
from Wolverhampton, an area which
has seen high levels of coronavirus
and also high levels of death. We
have pre—recorded questions from
have pre-recorded questions from
there, sadly
have pre—recorded questions from
there, sadly we cannot be there in
person. If
there, sadly we rannot be there in
person. If you
there, sadly we cannot be there in
person. If you have anything you
want to feed into the panel here
from home, contact us on social
media. I will get those comments and
I will feed them in as we go along.
Let’s take our
Let’s take ourfirst
I will feed them in as we go along.
Let’s take our first question.
Before we do, particularly because
Before we do, particularty because
you are here,
Before we do, particularly because
you are here, Rachel on your day
off. Thank you so much and you are
on the front we want to do our clap
for carers. Let’s show our
appreciation.
APPLAUSE
Let’s take our first pre-recorded
question
Let’s take our first pre—recorded
question tonight from Frank Wilson.
Good evening. My question is this.
The mark of a civilised society is
how it provides for its most
vulnerable members. How many marks
out of ten with the panel give to
this country for its record on
social care. 50 how many marks out
social rare. So how many marks out
of ten? Rachel,
social care. 50 how many marks out
of ten? Rachel, since this is your
area? Absolutely. In answer to this
question I ran
question I can say that I am seeing
question I ran say that I am seeing
right now,
question I can say that I am seeing
right now, precisely on the front
line, exactly the esteem in which we
hold our most vulnerable members of
society. Of course, people in care
society. Of course, peopla in rare
homes are
homes are predominantly elderly
homes are predominantly elderty
citizens,
homes are predominantly elderly
citizens, sometimes young citizens
who are disabled as well. We know
these individuals, historically, not
just for the last ten years, but for
the last couple of decades across
both political parties have been
some of the most marginalised,
neglacted,
neglected, abandoned and diminished
members of our society. Successive
governments, both Labour and
Conservative I have to say, although
in the last ten years under the
guise of austerity, these have been
Conservative governments, have
prevaricated, talked the talk about
prevarirated, talked the talk about
addressing
prevaricated, talked the talk about
addressing the grotesque
underfunding of our social care
underfunding of our social rare
sector
underfunding of our social care
sector while failing to deliver.
There have been 17 White papers,
There have been 17 white papers,
green papers
There have been 17 White papers,
green papers and national state
reviews into the funding of our
social care sector in the last 20
social rare sector in the last 20
years and
social care sector in the last 20
years and precisely no action. 50
years and precisely no action. So
now, we
years and precisely no action. 50
now, we have a sector we
years and precisely no action. So
now, we have a sector we know is
raring for
caring for society’s most vulnerable
members and yet it has been run down
members and yet it has been mn down
and under
members and yet it has been run down
and underfunded into an
and under funded into an absolute
travesty of what it should be. You
have that as the background into
which inserts itself a virus that we
know from China and Italy
particularly, affects these
vulnerable, elderly members of
vulnerable, elderty members of
society more
vulnerable, elderly members of
society more than anyone else. The
death rate soars once you get into
people in the 705 and 805. How do
peopla in the 705 and 805. How do
you think the
people in the 705 and 805. How do
you think the government has
responded to that when it comes to
rare
care homes? Absolutely inadequate
rare homes? Absolutely inadequate
woefully, I
care homes? Absolutely inadequate
woefully, I am afraid. They need to
change the
change the testing policy when only
people in hospital were being tested
was the point at which people in
was the point at which peopla in
rare
was the point at which people in
care homes and people receiving care
rare homes and people receiving rare
in their
care homes and people receiving care
in their own homes were thrown under
a bus, they were abandoned. And so
were the absolutely extraordinary
men and women who are carers
themselves. We are meant to have
parity in this country, we are meant
to have a department that is the
Department of Health and social
rare, yet the
care, yet the social side of that
rare, yet the social side of that
department
care, yet the social side of that
department is the Cinderella
service. We have 122,000 vacancies
in the rare
in the care sector. Many carers are
in the rare sector. Many carers are
paid the
in the care sector. Many carers are
paid the minimum wage, they are
treated without respect. Yesterday
the Health Secretary, Matt Hancock,
tried to address that by offering
them a badge. We have had are
commenting about the badge. Let me
just find it. Please explain why a
badge is supposed to make a real
difference to me and my colleagues
in the fight against Covid—19 when
in the fight against Covid-19 when
we
in the fight against Covid—19 when
we need PPE and testing. Robert, you
have heard the directors saying it
is shambolic, haphazard and paltry.
There has been a huge amount of
criticism in the way the government
has handled the social sector when
it comes to coronavirus, what Marx
it comes to coronavims, what Marx
would you give
it comes to coronavirus, what Marx
would you give the government on
that? Marks out of ten are difficult
to assess at the moment. I am not
going to pretend everything in the
garden is lovely because a lot of us
have relatives and friends we know
in rare
in care homes who are getting
in rare homes who are getting
outstanding
in care homes who are getting
outstanding treatment from carers
who work so hard and incredibly
hard. I think the badge is
hard. I think the badge isjust part
hard. I think the badge is just part
of a
hard. I think the badge isjust part
of a sincere and genuine move, not
just by the government but by the
rare system
care system itself to seek and
rare system itself to seek and
improve the
care system itself to seek and
improve the recognition for care
improve the recognition for rare
workers.
improve the recognition for care
workers. But if you don’t want to
give an answer with marks out of
ten, how would you rate, categorise,
describe the government’s
performance in the coronavirus
crisis when it comes to social care
so far? I would say a lot more to
do. which
do. Which is
so far? I would say a lot more to
do. which is why
do. Which is why this announcement
do. which is why this announcement
by Matt
do. Which is why this announcement
by Matt Hancock yesterday was
welcome. The testing that is
required, the treatment we are
embarking on for extra care workers
embarking on for extra rare workers
and the genuine
embarking on for extra care workers
and the genuine push by government
to deal with, what is a very
vulnerable sector. I think it is
right to talk about the particular
challanges
challenges in care homes. We want to
challanges in rare homes. We want to
see that
challenges in care homes. We want to
see that infection rate reduced
within our care homes. Because if we
within our rare homes. Because if we
don’t
within our care homes. Because if we
don’t reduce it there, indeed of the
vulnerable part of our society, we
are not going to get the overall
rate down. That is so important in
dealing with this crisis. Lisa, the
question is how many marks out of
ten should the government receive
for its treatment of social care in
for its treatment of social rare in
this
for its treatment of social care in
this current crisis? I don’t want to
get into scoring the government out
of ten. In the Labour leadership
of ten. In the labour leadership
contest
of ten. In the Labour leadership
contest we were all asked to score
each other out of ten and it doesn’t
get as anywhere as a country. The
thing I want to see the government
do now is recognise, as I think Matt
Hancock has, they have been too slow
to understand the crisis in emerging
in our rare
in our care homes and just take
in our rare homes and just take
action to
in our care homes and just take
action to deal with it. There was a
commitment early on the NHS would
commitment earty on the NHS would
get all the
commitment early on the NHS would
get all the resources it needs to
deal with this crisis. The same
commitment should surely be made to
social rare
social care as well. It is important
social rare as well. It is important
the
social care as well. It is important
the government starts producing
daily statistics about deaths in
daily statistis about deaths in
rare
daily statistics about deaths in
care homes, because we need to track
rare homes, because we need to track
this,
care homes, because we need to track
this, understand where the problem
is and what more we need to be doing
to tackle it. We need to roll out
testing to the social care sector. I
welcome the fact the government has
said they will now do this and has
started to do this but we have 1.2
million peopla
million people who work in our
million peopla who work in our
social
million people who work in our
social care sector and as of
social rare sector and as of
yesterday,
social care sector and as of
yesterday, only around 500 tests had
been carried out. The biggest issue
I get from home carers, care home
I get from home carers, rare home
workers
I get from home carers, care home
workers here in Wigan is still this
workers here in wigan is still this
question
workers here in Wigan is still this
question about PPE, personal
protective equipment. Last night,
one of those care home workers
one of those rare home workers
messaged me
one of those care home workers
messaged me to say she had been on
Amazon buying protective gear,
because although they finally got
sent some masks, they are already
mnning out. She
running out. She said it is really,
mnning out. She said it is really,
really hard to
running out. She said it is really,
really hard to overstate how scared
really hard to overstate how stared
people are.
really hard to overstate how scared
people are. We are trying our best
peopla are. We are trying our best
not to
people are. We are trying our best
not to get this virus but we know it
is a question of when, not if. They
are working in small rooms where
they cannot socially distance and it
takes two people to move a person so
they cannot keep away from each
other. I have one constituent who
has a wife and young baby at home.
He is not just
He is notjust terrified about
He is not just terrified about
getting it
He is notjust terrified about
getting it himself giving it to the
vulnerable people he is looking
after, he is terrified about what is
going to happen to his family as
well. The worst thing about the
message I got last night was a
common theme, she said to me don’t
reveal who I am because I would lose
my job. We have
myjob. We have shamefully
my job. We have shamefully
underpaid,
myjob. We have shamefully
underpaid, undertreated, undervalue
people who work in this vital
peopla who work in this vital
sector.
people who work in this vital
sector. We have done this for a very
long time and we need the get them
the support they need to do their
important
importantjoh
the support they need to do their
important job safely.
importantjob safely. When this is
importantjob safely. when this is
over we
importantjob safely. When this is
over we need a proper reckoning as a
country about how we came to get
this so badly wrong. Karen? We are
in awe of the NHS and what they have
done. But who has mentioned the care
done. But who has mentioned the rare
sector in
done. But who has mentioned the care
sector in the last month and
suddenly it has come to light? 1.5
million people work in the sector,
million peopla work in the sector,
doing an
million people work in the sector,
doing an amazing job in difficult
circumstances and getting paid very
little and looking after a million
peoplo.
people. Half of them are in care
peopla. Half of them are in rare
homes
people. Half of them are in care
homes and the other half are at
home. This is extraordinary work and
what I find difficult to understand
is we have been measuring the sad
deaths and every death is awful
under my thoughts go out to all of
the families and loved ones. We have
not been counting the care homes. I
not been counting the rare homes. I
don’t
not been counting the care homes. I
don’t understand. We know from other
countries, 50% of the deaths often
countries, 5096 of the deaths often
take place in
countries, 50% of the deaths often
take place in care homes and we have
take place in rare homes and we have
not been testing
take place in care homes and we have
not been testing the staff, not been
testing the patience. They have been
going to hospital, and I am hearing
stories of them going to hospital,
not being tested and then going back
to the care homes. 50 at long last
to the rare homes. So at long last
it is getting the
to the care homes. 50 at long last
it is getting the attention and the
focus it deserves. We will be
learning lots of lessons about this
learning lots of lassons about this
and will
learning lots of lessons about this
and will be better as a country
looking forward and I think the care
looking forward and I think the rare
sector
looking forward and I think the care
sector will be more highlighted,
appreciated, funded and resorts.
Gareth Thomas says, to isolate and
catch the spread of the virus you
should test everyone in care homes,
should test everyone in rare homes,
when you note
should test everyone in care homes,
when you note the residents that
have it versus those that don’t,
same for the carers. Only then can
same for the carers. Only then ran
you isolate and
same for the carers. Only then can
you isolate and deal with the
coronavirus. If we knew from the
start, says Rona, this will kill
older and vulnerable people more,
older and vulnerable peopla more,
why weren’t
older and vulnerable people more,
why weren’t nursing in care homes
why weren’t nursing in rare homes
the priority?
why weren’t nursing in care homes
the priority? What else can we
conclude except they didn’t care. It
conclude except they didn’t rare. It
does
conclude except they didn’t care. It
does seem odd, Robert, the advice
given by Public Health England in
Febmary at
February at the start of all this,
whilst it
whilst it remains unlikely that
peopla
people receiving care in a care home
people receiving rare in a rare home
would
people receiving care in a care home
would become infected. There was no
PPE and they were told not to wear
masks because they serve no purpose.
Looking back with hindsight, that
seems extraordinary? It was advice
that was tendered, listen to and the
priority was given to the front line
in the NHS. Do you think it was the
right advice? Care homes are complex
right advice? (“are homes are complex
places. If they
right advice? Care homes are complex
places. If they can be managed in a
places. If they ran be managed in a
way, if there is a
places. If they can be managed in a
way, if there is a particular
problem on a particular wing and
they ran
they can isolate that group of
they ran isolate that group of
peopla
they can isolate that group of
people carefully, it can be managed
peopla carefully, it ran be managed
in a
people carefully, it can be managed
in a sensible way. But there is no
doubt, because of the age and the
vulnerability, the fact elderly
vulnerability, the fact elderty
peopla
vulnerability, the fact elderly
people are suffering with complex
conditions. That was not my point.
when you have
When you have a lot of people with
when you have a lot of peopla with
undertying
When you have a lot of people with
underlying conditions and are
undertying conditions and are
elderty
underlying conditions and are
elderly they will be vulnerable to
elderty they will be vulnerable to
this
elderly they will be vulnerable to
this disease. Robert, I think that
is slightly disingenuous. We had a
lot of information from other
countries who were ahead of us in
terms of the impact on people in
terms of the impact on peopla in
rare
terms of the impact on people in
care homes from this virus. 50 we
rare homes from this vims. So we
knew exactly
care homes from this virus. 50 we
knew exactly what we were going to
be up against. For example, in Italy
and Spain ahead of us on the curve,
we had the most appalling reports of
paramedics going into resident’s
paramedic going into resident’s
homes
paramedics going into resident’s
homes and care homes and finding
homes and rare homes and finding
those elderty
homes and care homes and finding
those elderly men and women
literally lying dead in their beds.
They had just died of coronavirus
with nobody there, they had died
alone, the worst possible kind of
death. We knew that weeks and weeks
ago. The other thing that is
important to stress is, what we are
hearing about PPE, it is easy to
talk about that in abstract terms,
but for the people who are actually
but for the peopla who are actually
raring for
but for the people who are actually
caring for these patients, whether
raring for these patients, whether
they are NHS
caring for these patients, whether
they are NHS or social carers, it is
really hard to overemphasise how
frightening it is to go to work, put
on PPE, that you know in many cases
is lower in standards than the WHO
standards. You do the best you can,
standards. You do the best you ran,
you rannot do
standards. You do the best you can,
you cannot do anything but help your
vulnerable patients or people you
are raring for,
are caring for, but you know it is
are raring for, but you know it is
inadequate.
are caring for, but you know it is
inadequate. That is even in hospital
sometimes where we are getting the
best supply of PPE. In care homes, I
best supply of PPE. In rare homes, I
know
best supply of PPE. In care homes, I
know because people are telling me,
know because peopla are telling me,
I work
know because people are telling me,
I work with carers, they having to
do things like literally where a
sanitary towel over their face
because that is the best they can
because that is the best they ran
come up with
because that is the best they can
come up with to protect themselves
from infection. They are not getting
the masks, they are having to reuse
the masks, they are not getting the
gowns and they are not getting
everything they need. They should
have protection on their eyes and
they are not getting it. They still
help these vulnerable patients and
they do that putting their own lives
at risk and the lives of their
children, their
children, theirfamilies
at risk and the lives of their
children, their families at risk.
children, theirfamilies at risk. It
children, their families at risk. It
is just not
children, theirfamilies at risk. It
isjust not acceptable
is just not acceptable to say, we
are doing more, we are going to fix
this. Where is the PPE now? We are a
this. where is the PPE now? We are a
rich country with a
this. Where is the PPE now? We are a
rich country with a fifth richest
economy in the world, surely it is
within the remit of this country and
this government to produce
sufficient paper masks and plastic
gowns to protect carers and if not,
why not?
m:
We have a comment, saying I run a
We have a comment, saying I nm a
rare home
We have a comment, saying I run a
care home and my staff place their
rare home and my staff place their
lives on
care home and my staff place their
lives on the line every day. They
have been ignored by successive
governments. We can’t even order PPE
for their safety. Despite that, they
remain diligent and professional.
Another question, from Duncan. So,
given the potential plight of many
SMFs,
SMEs, likely to go out of business
SMFs, likely to go out of business
duﬂng
during this
SMEs, likely to go out of business
during this endless lockdown, what
is the panel’s view of how the
Government is going to manage and
balance the transition out of
lockdown anytime soon, without
compromising the health of nation?
Karan, I
Karen, I wanted to ask you, first.
Karan, I wanted to ask you, first.
As head
Karen, I wanted to ask you, first.
As head and founder of Cobra Beer
are, how is this affecting your
business? I can only assume badly?
business? I ran only assume badly?
And what
business? I can only assume badly?
And what is your view in terms of
how we begin to come out of this?
Duncan is talking about SMEs in
Duncan is talking about SMFs in
particular.
Duncan is talking about SMEs in
particular. Small
particular. Smalland
Duncan is talking about SMEs in
particular. Small and medium—sized
particular. Small and medium-sized
enterprises, I
particular. Small and medium—sized
enterprises, I should say. No
enterprises, Ishould say. No
question
enterprises, I should say. No
question about it, this is the worst
possibla crisis.
possible crisis. It is a living
possibla crisis. It is a living
nightmare
possible crisis. It is a living
nightmare for the business sector.
Not just in the
Notjust in the UK, but around the
Not just in the UK, but around the
world. It is
Notjust in the UK, but around the
world. It is a demand shock, supply
shocks, domino effect, everybody in
the supply chain. In our case, we
the supply chain. In our use, we
sunplv
the supply chain. In our case, we
supply thousands of restaurants.
Basically, they are all shocked.
They are not allowed to operate.
Some do take away, but that’s only a
small amount. They have no revenue.
It directly affects us and the vast
majority of our sales are in the
foundation of restaurants. We can
foundation of restaurants. We ran
sunplv
foundation of restaurants. We can
supply supermarkets, but with the
production, we can’t produce because
a lot of staff are not, for safety
reasons, working. 50 the production
reasons, working. So the production
is
reasons, working. 50 the production
is reduced. Even supermarket sales
are not as high as they could be. We
are affected very badly. We hold
webinars with the restaurants every
week and they are crying. They have
mn out of
run out of cash already. The loans,
mn out of rash already. The loans,
a huge amount of
run out of cash already. The loans,
a huge amount of money has been
provided by the government, is that
not working? Full credit to the
government, they did a great
government, they did a greatjob
government, they did a great job
right at the
government, they did a greatjob
right at the beginning. Three of
them £30 billion, £60 billion of
them 50 billion, £60 billion of
employee
them £30 billion, £60 billion of
employee support, rates being free
for a year. --
for a year. —— £330 billion. Being
for a year. -- £130 billion. Being
able to delay
for a year. —— £330 billion. Being
able to delay your taxes and VAT,
not having landlords able to throw
you out for three months. That has
been fantastic. Grants as well. At
the one help that businesses need is
(“ash now,
Cash now, and that is the business
(“ash now, and that is the business
interruption
Cash now, and that is the business
interruption loan scheme,
particularly the one for under £145
particularty the one for under £145
million
particularly the one for under £145
million turnover company is. It’s
not working as well as it should.
300,000 businesses applied for
these. At the moment, the Government
guarantees 8096
guarantees 80% of the loans. Out of
guarantees 8096 of the loans. Out of
the
guarantees 80% of the loans. Out of
the 300,000, just 6000 have been
given the loans, three and a half
weeks later. Only £1 billion out of
this. I think the main reason, and I
were saying this from the beginning,
we’ve got to be like Germany is
doing, like Switzerland is doing,
doing, like Switzeriand is doing,
where
doing, like Switzerland is doing,
where the government guarantees 100%
where the government guarantees 10096
of the
where the government guarantees 100%
of the loans
where the government guarantees 10096
of the loans up
where the government guarantees 100%
of the loans up to £500,000. In
Switzerland, they guarantee to give
Switzertand, they guarantee to give
you that
Switzerland, they guarantee to give
you that money and 48 hours. I know
businesses that have got the loan,
appﬁed
applied for it and got it within 12
hours. We need to apply, within a
limit, £500,000, because it is
mainly the SMEs that need that help.
mainly the SMB that need that help.
If they get
mainly the SMEs that need that help.
If they get that 100% guarantee,
If they get that 10096 guarantee,
then
If they get that 100% guarantee,
then the banks will be able to lend
then the banks will be able to land
that
then the banks will be able to lend
that money. Because they won’t be
worrying about being liable for the
20%? The Government is going the
2096? The Government is going the
extra
20%? The Government is going the
extra mile. Interest rates are 0.1%,
extra mile. Interest rates are 0.196,
the lowest
extra mile. Interest rates are 0.1%,
the lowest since when the Bank of
England was founded. You have to
give credit to what the Government
is doing. Do this extra bit and the
money will flow through and then the
businesses will get the cash they
businesses will get the rash they
need
businesses will get the cash they
need now. And they need the cash.
need now. And they need the rash.
What
what is
need now. And they need the cash.
What is the point of these other
measures? The employee support
scheme is fantastic, £250,000 a
month,
scheme is fantastic, £250,000 3
month, 80% of
scheme is fantastic, £250,000 a
month, 80% of salaries, it’s great.
month, 8096 of salaries, it’s great.
If the company
month, 80% of salaries, it’s great.
If the company isn’t surviving when
we come out of the lockdown, they
need this cash to survive. I think
need this rash to survive. I think
the 1001:
need this cash to survive. I think
the 100% will do it. Lisa? I think
the 10096 will do it. Lisa? I think
the
the 100% will do it. Lisa? I think
the Government was right to extend
the lockdown today. I think we have
to be guided by the evidence about
infection rates and whether this is
under control, and the criteria they
set out around making sure the NHS
could cope, in particular, that is
very, very important. There are
definitely things that could be done
now to help deal with the economic
fallout from all of this. I very,
very much agree that the loan scheme
to small businesses needs to be
reformed.
reformed. The number that have been
able to access this is a vanishingly
small. And that’s because the banks
are reluctant to lend
are reluctant to [end because the
are reluctant to lend because the
government
are reluctant to [end because the
government tracker hasn’t
underwritten 100% of those loans, as
underwritben10096 of those loans, as
you rightly
underwritten 100% of those loans, as
you rightly heard has been done in
Germany and Switzerland. That means
Germany and Switzertand. That means
that
Germany and Switzerland. That means
that businesses are not getting the
help they need. I have businesses in
wigan that are
Wigan that are perfectly profitable,
wigan that are perfectly profitabla,
healthy,
Wigan that are perfectly profitable,
healthy, viable businesses, but they
are taking a short—term hit now
are taking a short-term hit now
because they
are taking a short—term hit now
because they are say a travel
business, where people clearly
business, where peopla dearty
aren’t
business, where people clearly
aren’t booking holidays at the
moment. But once this is over, they
will start to see recovery. They
need the cash now, and they simply
need the rash now, and they simply
can’t get it. But I
need the cash now, and they simply
can’t get it. But I think alongside
that as well, we need to think about
what is our exit strategy for
lockdown, and started to set out
some clarity from the government
about how they anticipate is
looking. Because many of these small
businesses are having to make
decisions about how long they can
decisions about how long they ran
remain
decisions about how long they can
remain viable in this situation.
remain viabla in this situation.
They may
remain viable in this situation.
They may need additional support, if
this is going to go on for a long
time. In other countries, the
lifting of restrictions has happened
in very, very different ways. In
some countries, small businesses
have been allowed to reopen, small
shops have been allowed to reopen. I
was speaking to the Prime Minister
in Sweden today, who... They have
pursued a strategy of keeping some
businesses open and still running.
businesses open and still mnning.
If
businesses open and still running.
If businesses knew what the
Government was intending, they would
be able to start planning for this
now. At the moment, they
now. At the moment, theyjust don’t
now. At the moment, they just don’t
have the clarity
now. At the moment, theyjust don’t
have the clarity that they need
about what the Government is
proposing. And that means when we do
come out of this immediate public
health crisis, we may find that a
lot of peopla
lot of people don’t have those jobs
lot of peopla don’t have those jobs
to go back to.
lot of people don’t have those jobs
to go back to. Two things there,
Robert. Duncan asked how we can get
Robert. Duncan asked how we ran get
out of the
Robert. Duncan asked how we can get
out of the lockdown. Karan
out of the lockdown. Karen and Lisa
out of the lockdown. Karan and Lisa
were talking
out of the lockdown. Karen and Lisa
were talking about the business
interruption loans, going to 100%
instead of 80%. But also giving
business uncertainty, where you can,
business uncertainty, where you ran,
about
business uncertainty, where you can,
about when they might start to begin
to think about... Because they need
to plan, for when they might be
coming out of it? We can’t get away
from the inherent uncertainty that
we face. First of all, Karan’s point
we face. First of all, Karen’s point
about the banks and their role in
about the banks and their rola in
this,
about the banks and their role in
this, we have already taken action
to de-dog the
to de—clog the process, to make it
to de-dog the process, to make it
easier for
to de—clog the process, to make it
easierfor the money
easier for the money to
to de—clog the process, to make it
easierfor the money to reach
easier for the money to reach the
firms and people it is intended to
firms and peopla it is intended to
reach.
firms and people it is intended to
reach. The Treasury is constantly
looking at the scheme and its
operation to see how better... What
operation to see how better... what
about
operation to see how better... What
about businesses increasing the loan
coverage to 100%? Is a fair point. I
coverage to10096? Is a fair point. I
know the
coverage to 100%? Is a fair point. I
know the Treasury is considering the
operation of the scheme daily. They
set it up at breakneck speed. I
think tribute is being paid to the
fact that the Government really
stood up to the challenge and got on
with it. I
with it. Ithink
stood up to the challenge and got on
with it. I think the answer is that
we are looking daily at the
operation of this, because our
intention is, as the Chancellor
said, that we will do what it takes.
And we mean what we say buy that.
when we get
When we get comments in, for
when we get comments in, for
example, I mn
When we get comments in, for
example, I run a business employing
example, I nm a business employing
17 people and I
example, I run a business employing
17 people and I haven’t had a penny.
17 peopla and I haven’t had a penny.
I haven’t
17 people and I haven’t had a penny.
I haven’t had
17 peopla and I haven’t had a penny.
I haven’t had any
17 people and I haven’t had a penny.
I haven’t had any grants, loans, I
can’t get furlough money for myself.
I’m taking no salary. If I am still
in business in two weeks, it will be
a miracle. Another, and the
government back do more to ensure
that small businesses can get access
that small businesses ran get access
to the support
that small businesses can get access
to the support they have announced?
Banks are taking too long and
declining application for
coronavirus business interruption
coronavims business interruption
loans,
coronavirus business interruption
loans, despite having a viable
business. We help the bank with
billions, they must do more. You
must have heard this time and time
again? what ran
again? What can you practically do?
again? what ran you practically do?
That’s right,
again? What can you practically do?
That’s right, the banks have to help
us help everybody else. They have to
step up to the mark. This is a very
uncertain and risk—based time. We
uncertain and risk-based time. We
expect
uncertain and risk—based time. We
expect everybody to take their share
of risk. The Government is laying
billions of pounds on the line here
to save many, many businesses that
we think are worth saving, because
they do have a future. This is why
the Treasury is looking everyday at
how to improve and refine the system
to make sure it the people that need
that money. To the government’s
credit, you listened, right from
when Rishi announced these are the
measures, we said, you left out the
self-employed.
self—employed. You listened, and the
self-employed. You listened, and the
same
self—employed. You listened, and the
same employee support equivalent
goes to the self—employed. Then we
goes to the self-employed. Then we
said, you left
goes to the self—employed. Then we
said, you left out the charities.
There is now support for charities.
Maybe not as much as required, but
approaching just under £1 billion.
Similarty,
Similarly, the start—ups, the small
Similarty, the start-ups, the small
businesses,
Similarly, the start—ups, the small
businesses, the entrepreneurship,
there is no support for them, but
there is talk of a fund with private
and government supported... But that
needs to be set up quickly. The
squeezed middle were left out. You
increased the coronavirus business
increased the coronavims business
interruption
increased the coronavirus business
interruption scheme, and hopefully
will do that more. If you do this
one thing, client ensure you,
increase to 100%, it be worth it and
increase to 10096, it be worth it and
the money will
increase to 100%, it be worth it and
the money will flow through. Is
the money will ﬂow through. Is
important to
the money will flow through. Is
important to come back to the
original question, distress,
unfortunately,
u nfortu nately, however
original question, distress,
unfortunately, however much we are
all desperate for an exit strategy,
we need to hear it spells out now.
of
Of course, that’s not really the
right way to think about this. There
isn’t an exit strategy. It might be
better to think about a management
strategy for coronavirus. It isn’t
going to be quick. There is no quick
fix for this. We are not going to
suddenly a period where we say we
are relaxing the measures and go
back to life as normal, however much
we want to. This is going to be a
period of extended social distancing
and restrictions. Until a vaccine is
in place, and that is probably
sometime next year. The important
thing to think about here is what
are the measures we can take to
are the measures we ran take to
reduce
are the measures we can take to
reduce the overall length of time
that we are restricted, with all of
the economic fallout that entails?
And, crucially, that comes back to
what we started with testing. We
have to test, we have to contact
trace. If we are relaxing
restrictions socially, we have to
find another way of containing the
vims, reducing
virus, reducing transmission. As
Professor Niall Ferguson, who was
one of the scientists on whom the
Government is relying most strongly
on for the modelling of this has set
only this morning, testing is the
“Y
way to restrict transmission, so you
relax everything in the way that we
are desperate to, but you have to
test as well, you have to ramp it
up. Lisa, you wanted to come back
in? I
in? Iagree
up. Lisa, you wanted to come back
in? I agree with Rachel, but I think
in? Iagree with Rachel, but I think
she has given
in? I agree with Rachel, but I think
she has given more clarity about an
exit strategy than we have had from
the Government. Yesterday, we had a
health minister on social media
saying that there would not be a
lifting or an easing of these
restrictions until a vaccine was in
place. Effectively suggesting on
Twitter that this is going to be
here for 18 months. You’re talking
about Nadine Dorries? If this is the
use,
case, businesses and people need a
rase, businesses and people need a
level of
case, businesses and people need a
level of understanding about that,
they need the confidence in what the
Government is doing and why they are
doing it. I
doing it. Ithink
Government is doing and why they are
doing it. I think most people want
doing it. I think most peopla want
to do the right
doing it. I think most people want
to do the right thing, but this is
really hard for a lot
really ha rd for a lot of
to do the right thing, but this is
really hard for a lot of people. For
really hard for a lot of peopla. For
me, who lives
really hard for a lot of people. For
me, who lives with my family, who
has an outside space, we’ve got a
garden, this is a very different
prospect from somebody who is
really, really worried they are
going to lose their
going to lose theirjob, who lives
in an overcrowded ﬂat with no
outside space, who has caring
responsibilities or lives alone. So
the Government needs to set up more
clarity about how they see this
developing. I appreciate they don’t
want to go out mixed messages, but
at the moment, that is what is
happening. In a public health
crisis, the public need confidence
that the measures that are being put
in place will work, they need to
understand them and then they will
follow them. Do you want to come in,
brieﬂy? I
brieﬂy? Itake
follow them. Do you want to come in,
briefly? I take response ——
brieﬂy? I take response --
respectful
briefly? I take response ——
respectful issue with the mixed
messages. We don’t want to create
mixed messages, and we are not. The
five tests that were set out today,
and I think Rachel is right to talk
about testing, it actually gives a
very dear
very clear map as to how we work our
very dear map as to how we work our
“Y
way out of this.
very clear map as to how we work our
way out of this. The advice that is
going to be given by the
strategic... The Sage Group, the
strategic advisory group on... The
EWUP
group that meets to deal with
emergencies, they will guide the
government. We will be looking at
that advice as it develops over the
next few weeks. And that is the
approach the public would expect us
to take, listening to the expert
advice, and then having a programme
of planned return to normality over
a period. That’s clear. That is
a period. That’s dear. That is
something I
a period. That’s clear. That is
something I think the public
respect, and they understand. And
there is a simplicity and that which
has cut through to millions of
peopla. You
people. You mentioned testing, new
__ you
—— you mentioned testing. Did the
Government failed to act for two
months because they knew we could
not respond in the same way as
Germany? They managed to test,
monitor and hospitalise sooner and
more efficiently, therefore
maintaining a much lower death rate.
Karan, you have an interesting story
about testing. You have had
coronavirus, thankfully, it wasn’t a
coronavims, thankfully, it wasn’t a
pleasant
coronavirus, thankfully, it wasn’t a
pleasant experience, but you came
out the other side. Now, the
Government has talked about trying
to get the Holy Grail of an antibody
test. So,
test. 50, test will tell you if
to get the Holy Grail of an antibody
test. So, test will tell you if you
have had it,
test. 50, test will tell you if you
have had it, and therefore
test. So, test will tell you if you
have had it, and therefore you may
have some degree of immunity. So
far, they have not been able to get
one that works. But you have managed
to get that works?
ﬂ
Imaintain
I maintain personally one of the key
solutions to getting out of this
crisis overall is testing. It is the
World Health Organization, the head
of it lead over a month ago to the
hold world, test, test, test.
Germany is testing half a million a
week. They were testing over 100,000
a day and I am glad the government
has a target to get to 100,002
weeks, and I hope they do. What
weeks, and I hope they do. what
works is
weeks, and I hope they do. What
works is when the government, the
private sector, NHS, Armed Forces,
they put up the Nightingale Hospital
in nine days. How did you get hold
of your antibody test? I will get to
that, but what works is a
collaboration of universities,
government, I get the impression it
has not happened but now I
understand it is. We have the
pharmaceutical companies, the
laboratories and the NHS and the
government working together. In my
rase,
use, when I
government working together. In my
case, when I had the disease, the
rase, when I had the disease, the
infection, I
case, when I had the disease, the
infection, I could not get tested.
It was only allowed in hospitals and
at that time, not even the NHS staff
were allowed to get tested. I could
not get tested and my doctor said
the only way, if you want to find
out, I ran
out, I can send it to a laboratory
out, I ran send it to a laboratory
in journey,
injourney, I
out, I ran send it to a laboratory
injourney, Igot
out, I can send it to a laboratory
injourney, I got an intravenous
blood test and then you will get to
know for sure. I got the result and
it shows I have the antibodies. Just
it shows I have the antibodies. just
to be clear,
it shows I have the antibodies. Just
to be clear, that was a test to show
you had had it? It was an antibody
test. The government has the right
approach in wanting to have them
widely available and the our home
kits, mass produced in China. There
is a test to say you have got it at
the moment, but the test you had is
to say you had it. Yes, the antibody
test. How can Karan get that and no
test. How ran Karan get that and no
one else
test. How can Karan get that and no
one else can? The government is
one else ran? The government is
right saying
one else can? The government is
right saying there’s no point in
having antibody tests are widely
available if you cannot rely on
them. The mass produced ones, take a
pinprick and it gives you an instant
result, but they are giving false
positives. My mother sent to a
laboratory. In Germany? Why cannot
laboratory. In Germany? why rannot
they do that
laboratory. In Germany? Why cannot
they do that here? They clearly
they do that here? They dearty
exist, they
they do that here? They clearly
exist, they exist in Germany, why
can’t we have them? One of the
issues we found, as Karan said, we
have looked to some of these tests
that were available, and they did
not pass muster. But this one did?
Germanrs
Germany’s diagnostic industry is
Germanrs diagnostic industry is
much
Germany’s diagnostic industry is
much bigger than ours. But we don’t
have this test at all? We are
starting further back in the field
than they are. Their death rate is
lower because their rate of testing
has been much higher. If we tested
more, what are death rate to exactly
the same? If we were testing much
more widely we might have a
different set of statistics. What we
different set of statistic. what we
are doing is
different set of statistics. What we
are doing is working to ramp it up
and as Karan said we have the
partnership between the public and
private sector now. Just to be
private sector now. just to be
clear,
private sector now. Just to be
clear, Robert, sorry. What you seem
dear, Robert, sorry. what you seem
to be saying is
clear, Robert, sorry. What you seem
to be saying is therefore if we had
tested more widely earlier, we would
tested more widely eartier, we would
have
tested more widely earlier, we would
have fewer deaths now? I think that
is what you are saying? I am
explaining why the German death rate
is as it
knﬂh
explaining why the German death rate
is as it is. It is very invidious
task for anybody at the moment to
make direct international
comparisons because we all came out
this at different times, we have all
taken slightly different approaches
and therefore you are comparing
apples with peers. There is no doubt
apples with pears. There is no doubt
we ran
apples with peers. There is no doubt
we can learn a lot from other
we ran learn a lot from other
countries,
we can learn a lot from other
countries, we’re watching very
carefully what actions and steps are
being taken across Europe, no doubt
about that. But the particular
approach will have to be tailored to
domestic need and what we are facing
here in the UK. I actually think the
opposite in some respects. I think
the international comparison between
what has happened here in the UK and
Germany is very revealing indeed. We
know that the first cases appeared
know that the first rases appeared
in Germany
know that the first cases appeared
in Germany and the UK at almost
exactly the same time. However,
Germany introduced its most
stringent lockdown measures a full
week, just over a week before the
UK. So
UK. 50 that we can is absolutely
UK. So that we ran is absolutely
critical
UK. 50 that we can is absolutely
critical and it will take a long
time to find out precisely how
important that was in overall
numbers of deaths and transmission
that could have been avoided, at a
time when we were still allowing the
Cheltenham horse racing festival to
go
Cheltenham horse racing festivth
go ahead
Cheltenham horse racing festival to
go ahead where 250,000 people
crammed themselves into the stands.
That is one important comparison.
The other is, yes, Germany has a
much better developed pharmaceutical
industry, everybody agrees on that.
But also, the amount of money
Germany spends per capita on health
Germany spends per rapita on health
is significantly
Germany spends per capita on health
is significantly different than the
UK. So
UK. 50 here in the NHS, we spend
UK. So here in the NHS, we spend
£3000 per
UK. 50 here in the NHS, we spend
£3000 per capita in the UK on
£3000 per rapita in the UK on
health.
£3000 per capita in the UK on
health. In Germany, that figure is
SO%
5096 higher, it
health. In Germany, that figure is
50% higher, it is £4500 per capita.
5096 higher, it is £4500 per rapita.
So go figure,
50% higher, it is £4500 per capita.
So go figure, you have a starting
point that is 50% more capacity in
point that is 5096 more capacity in
how you are
point that is 50% more capacity in
how you are going to manage this
crisis. So
crisis. 50 there is a lesson there
crisis. So there is a lesson there
in terms of
crisis. 50 there is a lesson there
in terms of how
in terms of howl
crisis. 50 there is a lesson there
in terms of how I would suggest we
fund our health service, because we
would be better able to manage the
pandemic if we had a stronger
starting point. On the point of
testing, there is another crucial
difference between Germany and the
UK. That is, to begin with our
strategy was broadly the same, it
was to test every case and
was to test every rase and
rigorously
was to test every case and
rigorously contact race. 50 the
moment
rigorously contact race. So the
moment you identified a case, you
moment you identified a use, you
trace
moment you identified a case, you
trace everybody else, you shut them
down and self isolated them to try
and stop transmission. There was a
point of course in the UK, at which
the government changed strategy. On
the basis of the advice they were
given, to abandon testing and
contract testing in the community
with many epidemiologists would
argue with pretty catastrophic fall.
Pub“:
Public Health England said in March
the 26, I think it was
the 26, I think it wasJennifer
the 26, I think it was jennifer
Harris,
the 26, I think it wasJennifer
Harris, there comes a point in a
pandemic when testing every case is
pandemic when testing every rase is
not an
pandemic when testing every case is
not an intervention. Yes, it was
Jenny
jenny Harris
not an intervention. Yes, it was
Jenny Harris who said that. Was that
jenny Harris who said that. Was that
right? I
right? Iwould
Jenny Harris who said that. Was that
right? I would defer to the World
Health Organization on this, I am
not an epidemiologist. But the World
Health Organization have been clear,
the way you address any infectious
outbreak is test, test, test. It is
one of the most important measures
you ran take.
you can take. That is what happens
you ran take. That is what happens
in Ebola, for
you can take. That is what happens
in Ebola, for instance and in China
and many other countries. And I
would exercise a note of caution, it
may be your test was a very good
test, but I think Chris Whitty, the
test, but I think Chris whitty, the
Chief
test, but I think Chris Whitty, the
Chief Medical Officer and Patrick
Vallance, the
Valiance, the chief scientific
Vallance, the chief scientific
officer,
Valiance, the chief scientific
officer, are absolutely right when
they stress caution about diving in
and starting to mass produce a test
where we actually have not
rigorously, scientifically validated
it. The one I am talking about, the
one that is required in large
volumes, the want to see if you have
got it, one company is ready to
sunplv
supply1 million a week who have
been
supplyi million a week who have
been accredited around the world.
Why
why aren’t
been accredited around the world.
Why aren’t these tests are being
why aren’t these tests are being
made
Why aren’t these tests are being
made available. They can be tested,
made available. They ran be tested,
if they don’t
made available. They can be tested,
if they don’t have the virus, they
ran go into
can go into work. We should have
ran go into work. We should have
that testing
can go into work. We should have
that testing capability. Lisa, you
have been listening very patiently,
so I find it very extraordinary to
have somebody in the studio who has
had an antibody test knowing the
Prime Minister has been saying, this
is the holy Grail and someone has
had one from Germany. The question
is very specific, did the government
failed to act for two months because
we knew we couldn’t respond the same
as Germany, we didn’t have the
wherewithal, what is your response?
The honest answer is, we don’t know.
And while we will have to unpick
And whila we will have to unpick
what
And while we will have to unpick
what has happened and what has gone
wrong when this is over, we have an
immediate crisis we are trying to
deal with.
dealwith. It
immediate crisis we are trying to
deal with. It is widely acknowledged
we were too slow to recognise the
stale
scale of the problem and to
implement lockdown and there was
real confusion at the outset, about
what the government’s strategy was.
There were suggestions in the media
they were pursuing a strategy of
herd immunity where people would get
herd immunity where peopla would get
it and
herd immunity where people would get
it and then the population would
become immune. Labour was very
become immune. labour was very
supportive of
become immune. Labour was very
supportive of the strategy,
certainly at the very beginning? We
were pushing quite hard for lockdown
before it happened. I think it was
becoming apparent from other
countries, as well from the UK, that
was important and people were being
put at risk. If you remember, it
took
tookjeremy
put at risk. If you remember, it
tookJeremy Hunt to come out and
tookjeremy Hunt to come out and
push the
tookJeremy Hunt to come out and
push the government on contact
tracing and testing before we
started to get some action. The
thing that is important now, broadly
speaking the government has accepted
how important this is and is doing,
I believe sincerely, everything they
ran to try to
can to try to get access to those
ran to try to get access to those
tests.
can to try to get access to those
tests. Matt Hancock set a target of
100,000 tests which will have to be
hit in a couple of weeks and it
doesn’t look, from the figures that
name
came out this week, that we are
anywhere near of making progress on
those things as we should be. I
think it is really important that we
have a much bigger and renewed focus
on that. But I would also just take
you back to this point about having
a better understanding and a more
honest assessment and appraisal from
government about their strategy to
move the country on from this moment
when it is safe and appropriate to
do so. Because there is a concern
about the antibody tests that has
been raised by a number of
behavioural scientist, with people
behavioural scientist, with peopla
under
behavioural scientist, with people
under financial pressure to return
to work, you could end up with a
situation where people felt pressure
to go and get the virus in order
they could go and get on with their
lives. I don’t think most people
lives. I don’t think most peopla
would
lives. I don’t think most people
would do that, but I think we have
to be really, really careful about
how we communicate with the public
about how we are going to get out of
this crisis. Otherwise you could
have unintended consequences and
that’s why the government needs to
be much, much clearer about when
they anticipate we are going with
this. I
this. Iaccept
they anticipate we are going with
this. I accept this is a moving
thing that moves very fast and we
are going to have to respond to the
science and adjust the strategy
accordingly, but we have got to be
more open with the public about what
we are doing and why. Lisa makes a
point about behaviour. That is what
Sage will be doing, they will be
understanding that before they
advise the government. All the
things being talked about are being
done but we want to make sure we are
in a position to make sure we have a
much more conclusive picture. The
question is about testing, Robert.
The government or Matt Hancock has
committed to 100,000 tests a day in
a four night. We are currently at
35,000 capacity. —— fortnight.
35,000 capacity. -- fortnight.
Nothing like
35,000 capacity. —— fortnight.
Nothing like that is being carried
out. Only two weeks to go, are you
going to do it? It is a big
challange,
challenge, but look at how far we
challange, but look at how far we
have
challenge, but look at how far we
have come already. Matt Hancock is
confident that with the partnerships
we have now set
we have now setup,
confident that with the partnerships
we have now set up, we can
we have now setup, we can do that.
we have now set up, we ran do that.
Look how far
we have now setup, we can do that.
Look how far we have come in six
weeks. We have achieved huge strides
in terms of the way we are tackling
this. How are you going to get to
that target? We have to be ambitious
and it would be mealy—mouthed of us
and it would be meaty-mouthed of us
to say it would
and it would be mealy—mouthed of us
to say it would be easy to hit. Do
you have some expectation of meeting
it? We have to set a target that is
a challenge. It is a huge challenge
and we have set that to the
community who deal with this and we
are confident we can get there. We
are confident we ran get there. We
are making very
are confident we can get there. We
are making very good progress. We
will be back in two weeks and we
will find out. Let’s take a question
from Richard Clarke. The UK started
wearing facemasks, in countries like
japan,
Japan, Singapore and China, the
japan, Singapore and China, the
death
Japan, Singapore and China, the
death rate from this virus is
significantly less than it is here.
Facemasks have proven to help stop
the spread of this virus onto
someone else, so why aren’t we using
them? It may be awhile before
restrictions are eased in the UK so
would this be a good time to ask a
[oral clothing
local clothing manufacture, a lot of
[oral clothing manufacture, a lot of
them in
local clothing manufacture, a lot of
them in Wolverhampton, to
manufacture as many facemasks as
possibla and
possible and post them to households
possibla and post them to households
in
possible and post them to households
in the region. It could provide a
possible shortage issue further down
the line. Should we be wearing
facemasks, Rachel? It is a very
interesting question. The W still
interesting question. The w still
says no, their
interesting question. The W still
says no, their advice is not to
recommend that general members of
the public should wear face masks.
They have some very good reasons for
concern. If you wear a mask, you are
more likely to touch your face and
we know one of the main routes of
transmission of this virus of
infection is, you have picked it up
on your hands and then you touch
either your nose, your eyes or your
mouth. If you have something across
your face that invites you to touch
your face, it potentially increases
the risk of you infecting yourself.
There is another behavioural issue
here which is the perception, if you
are wearing a mask you are somehow
more protected so you may be more
inclined to undertake riskier
behaviours. You may not socially
distance in the same way you would
otherwise. There are some real
concerns around facemasks. The flip
concerns around facemasks. The ﬂip
side of
concerns around facemasks. The flip
side of that is, there is no
randomised control trial evidence
for whether or not facemasks are
beneficial or not in the case of
beneficial or not in the use of
coronavims,
beneficial or not in the case of
coronavirus, Covid—19 specifically.
coronavims, Covid-19 specifically.
We do
coronavirus, Covid—19 specifically.
We do have some evidence for other
viruses, but not this virus. Lots of
viruses, but not this vims. Lots of
countries
viruses, but not this virus. Lots of
countries are enforcing, Japan,
countries are enforcing, japan,
South
countries are enforcing, Japan,
South Korea, Hong Kong and then the
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Germany,
(‘zech Republic, Slovakia, Germany,
France, Spain
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Germany,
France, Spain they are all either
saying people have to wear them or
they are encouraging it. This is not
necessarily what the public assume
to be the case. There are two
to be the rase. There are two
reasons
to be the case. There are two
reasons for wearing a mask. One is
to decrease your risk of being
infected and the other is to
decrease your risk of infecting
other people if you, unbeknownst to
other peopla if you, unbeknownst to
yourself, have
other people if you, unbeknownst to
yourself, have the virus. You may be
yourself, have the vims. You may be
asymptomatic.
yourself, have the virus. You may be
asymptomatic. You may unknowingly be
spreading it to other people.
A cloth mask is pretty rubbish as a
A doth mask is pretty rubbish as a
form of
A cloth mask is pretty rubbish as a
form of protection for you, against
other peopla
other people coughing virus
other peopla coughing virus
partidas
other people coughing virus
particles over you. It might help a
partidas over you. It might help a
little bit.
particles over you. It might help a
little bit. But in terms of use, if
you are infected, protecting other
people from you transmitting the
peopla from you transmitting the
virus to
people from you transmitting the
virus to them, then actually there
is evidence that a cloth mask
reduces the amount of virus
particles that you are generating to
partidas that you are generating to
a 36th
particles that you are generating to
a 36th of what it would have been. I
was listening to Patrick Valiance,
was listening to Patrick Vallance,
the
was listening to Patrick Valiance,
the chief scientific adviser on
Monday, he said that masks don’t
necessarily protect the general
public, but they do help in stopping
you transmitting it to others. That
stmck me
struck me come in a pandemic, as a
stmck me come in a pandemic, as a
pretty good thing
struck me come in a pandemic, as a
pretty good thing to aim for. What
pretty good thing to aim for. what
is the
pretty good thing to aim for. What
is the Labour view? Does Labour have
is the labour view? Does labour have
a view on
is the Labour view? Does Labour have
a view on masks? Well, I’m not a
scientist. I would definitely be
guided by people who are in terms of
the advice that is given. This week,
we had a situation where the of New
York governor came out and said that
peopla will only
people will only be allowed out in
peopla will only be allowed out in
pub“:
public if
people will only be allowed out in
public if they are wearing face
masks. That has caused a lot of
concern for people in this country,
concern for peoplc in this country,
many of whom
concern for people in this country,
many of whom are not on lockdown. I
know we keep talking about lockdown,
but a lot of my constituents are
still going out to work every day.
Some of them are transport workers,
they work in food production, as
well as the care sectors. But others
well as the rare sectors. But others
are simply
well as the care sectors. But others
are simply going to work in car part
are simply going to work in far part
companies or
are simply going to work in car part
companies or construction sites.
companies or constmction sites.
They are
companies or construction sites.
They are going to work in
warehouses, packing boxes for a
minimum wage. And the number of
reports I have had from employees in
those industries about employers who
are not following the government
guidance, they are not allowing
their employees to work from home if
they ran, they
they can, they are not following and
they ran, they are not following and
enforcing
they can, they are not following and
enforcing social distance measures,
and they are not putting in place
proper hand washing facilities, they
are really, really worried about
these reports about face masks.
Because a face masks are needed,
they obviously need them. I think
there is a couple of things that the
Government could do quickly. The
first is to provide a level of
clarity about that, especially for
peopla
people that are going out and
peopla that are going out and
working on
people that are going out and
working on the front line. The
second thing that I think they could
do as well is to take seriously this
issue that there are many people
whose employers are currently
putting them at risk. I think most
businesses are trying to do the
right thing. But I have been
overwhelmed reports from people
across the north—west that are
across the north-west that are
dealing with
across the north—west that are
dealing with this, and I know that
many mayors and council leaders have
as well. I would urge the Government
to take action to protect people. I
to take action to protect peopla. I
think Lisa
to take action to protect people. I
think Lisa makes a really good point
about the way that companies are
treating their employees at this
time. The test of leadership is not
in good times, it’s in bad times. If
a company puts people first, that is
a company puts peopla first, that is
the most
a company puts people first, that is
the most important thing, the safety
and welfare of their people. When it
and welfare of their people. when it
comes to
and welfare of their people. When it
comes to masks, I realised when I
went to japan
went to Japan for the first time,
went to japan for the first time,
when I
went to Japan for the first time,
when I saw people wearing masks, I
when I saw peopla wearing masks, I
was then
when I saw people wearing masks, I
was then explained that actually,
they want to stop you getting
infected. So, that aspect of it...
The debate has been about whether it
protect yourself, but Patrick
Vallance said it can stop the
transmission. I thought,
transmission. Ithought, surely,
that’s worth having? I respect the
“Y
way the Government has been dealing
with this, they have been listening
to the scientists, we have all been
following what scientists advise us.
Maybe they will come round to saying
we need to use masks. It might
happen. Derek Hunter says it is so
difficult to buy any facemasks in
order to protect yourself. Many
outlets online are charging over the
outlats online are charging over the
odds for
outlets online are charging over the
odds for masks, and that is before
you add in postage and packing. What
you add in postage and packing. what
is happening
you add in postage and packing. What
is happening with masks? We know
that the Government is reviewing the
guidelines. Is it partly because we
haven’t got enough? Or is it that
the Government hasn’t decided on
this? I think the point was put
dearty
clearly about the evidence on this.
dearty about the evidence on this.
I think
clearly about the evidence on this.
I think when you haven’t got clear
evidence that masks are going to
make that key difference, then we
shouldn’t be privatising that. Why
shouldn’t be privatising that. why
are all
shouldn’t be privatising that. Why
are all these other countries doing
it? That seems puzzling to the
it? That seems puuling to the
people
it? That seems puzzling to the
people contacting us. The World
peopla contacting us. The World
Health
people contacting us. The World
Health Organization advice is
relevant, advice of medical and
scientific officers is relevant.
There are different types of masks,
there are plain cloth masks,
there are plain doth masks,
surgical
there are plain cloth masks,
surgical masks that are going to be
of real help to people that are
of real help to peopla that are
doing dose
of real help to people that are
doing close work, close contact work
doing dose work, close contact work
in hospitals or
doing close work, close contact work
in hospitals or other places. There
is a dear
is a clear case therefore masks. But
is a dear rase therefore masks. But
for the general
is a clear case therefore masks. But
for the general public? I have
listened carefully and I take the
point that you wear a mask to stop
you transmitting any particles or
you transmitting any partidas or
disease
you transmitting any particles or
disease to other people. I think we
are looking very carefully at the
evidence on this. And we are
constantly asking ourselves
questions about the strength or
otherwise of it, and then taking
action. But at the moment, it’s
right to prioritise those other
types of PPE that are clearly needed
types of PPE that are dearty needed
and are going
types of PPE that are clearly needed
and are going to make a difference
in terms of the transmission of this
disease. Coming to the other part of
the question, it’s fair to say
Government was caught out on a PPE,
in terms of not having enough, or as
much as peopla
much as people require, Richard is
much as peopla require, Richard is
saying
much as people require, Richard is
saying wouldn’t it be good to get
ahead of this on facemasks and start
asking [oral
asking local manufacturers to stop
asking [oral manufacturers to stop
making them.
asking local manufacturers to stop
making them. Wouldn’t it be good to
get in there early? The question of
get in there earty? The question of
getting in
get in there early? The question of
getting in there early, we have
getting in there earty, we have
already
getting in there early, we have
already ramped up the operation of
PPE. Put facemasks in particular? If
the evidence changes and we are told
that facemasks are necessary, I’m
confident we can ramp it up. We do
confident we ran ramp it up. We do
have the ability
confident we can ramp it up. We do
have the ability to do that. We have
shown in other areas that we can do
shown in other areas that we ran do
that. Let’s
shown in other areas that we can do
that. Let’s follow that evidence and
assess it regularly. There are two
assess it regularty. There are two
important
assess it regularly. There are two
important points, I would suggest.
One is whether or not the general
pub“:
public should be wearing simple
cloth facemasks, in order to reduce
transmission of this virus to other
peopla. The
people. Thejury
transmission of this virus to other
people. The jury is out there, the
WHO is still not advising that. At
many national countries and New
York, as you said, most definitely
are. It would be helpful to know
when the Government is going to give
the public a definitive answer on
that. I don’t think the evidence is
going to change quickly. It would be
helpful to know that sooner rather
than later. The second point is
about the PPE that we most
definitely know it is needed, and is
needed desperately on the front
line. That is the PPE that is
protecting front line staff, whether
NHS or carers, from infection. And
we know that there are huge problems
with capacity there. They are not
unique to the UK, there are problems
all over the world. But we also have
a country in lockdown right now. So
we have all of these SMEs, small and
medium—sized businesses, so many
medium-sized businesses, so many
peopla up and
medium—sized businesses, so many
people up and down the country that
peopla up and down the country that
are not working
people up and down the country that
are not working currently, where is
the national government led effort
to boost production? Rachel, about
20 seconds left? British businesses
there to step up to the mark.
Burberry is already making them. We
just heard
just heard Barbour is making masks.
We are out of time, I’m afraid. Just
We are out of time, I’m afraid. just
in time is off
We are out of time, I’m afraid. Just
in time is off air next week. We
will be back the week after, which
is, of course, April the 30th.
Tonight, our recorded questions came
from Wolverhampton. In two weeks we
would like to take questions from
Leeds. You can’t come to the studio,
not for some time, I suspect. And we
need to hear from you. Question Time
without an audience, even without an
-- even virtually,
—— even virtually, is not the same.
-- even virtually, is not the same.
So go to the
—— even virtually, is not the same.
So go to the website and apply in
the usual way. You can record your
the usual way. You ran record your
question on your
the usual way. You can record your
question on your phone or we will
give you advice on how to do it. If
you want to carry on the discussion,
what we have been talking about, as
always, you ran
always, you canjoin Adrian Chiles
always, you ranjoin Adrian Chiles
and guests on
always, you canjoin Adrian Chiles
and guests on Question Time Extra
Time. Thanks very much to the panel
for coming into the studio. Lisa,
thanks for
thanks forjoining us from Wigan.
thanks for joining us from wigan.
Thank you to
thanks forjoining us from Wigan.
Thank you to everybody he recorded a
question or got in touch during the
programme. From Question Time, for
this week, we will see you in two
weeks. Goodbye.
This is a message
from the Government.
Coronavirus is a national emergency,
life—threatening for people of all
ages, everywhere in the UK.
To help save lives, stay home.
Only go outside for food,
health reasons or work,
but only if you cannot
work from home.
Stay home.
Anyone can get it,
and anyone can spread it.
Stay home.
Protect the NHS frontline staff
working to save lives.
It’s finals week on MasterChef...
Wow, that’s hot.
Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa! Oh, no.
..and the battle for
the title is almost over.
I never, ever in my wildest dreams
thought I’d get this far.
I’m trying not to think about
going home at this point.
It would be absolutely devastating.
I get excited when I produce
a great plate of food.
It’s like creating
a masterpiece painting.
Itjust means so much to me.
To win would just be the cherry
on top of the cake.
You can see that
it’s just in your reach.
It would be such a huge
acknowledgement of my true passion,
and Ijust enjoy every
single second of it.
There’s been times
in this competition
where I’ve wobbled
with my confidence
and thinking,
"Should I really be here?"
So today I want to smash it
and get into that final three.
Tonight, the four finalists
enter the Willy Wonka world
of the world’s greatest
pastry chef...
..Albert Adria...
Stretch their imaginations.
Let that creativity run wild.
..before cooking off
to secure a coveted place
in the MasterChef 2020 final.
This is about high—end cooking.
This is about risk.
It has to be superb.
Barcelona, Spain.
Home to the culinary empire of a man
widely regarded as the world’s
most creative chef...
..Albert Adria.
When you talk to chefs
around the world
and you ask them, "Who is
the best cook on the planet?"
Technically speaking,
execution—wise,
most of them are going
to tell you Albert Adria.
Cos, pound for pound, he really is.
He can do it all.
35 years ago,
a teenage Albert went to work
alongside his older brother, Ferran,
where they led a revolution
that changed the world
of food forever.
Sauces became foams and airs,
ingredients and flavours
were turned into spheres,
and centuries—old cooking
techniques questioned.
Ferran and Albert sort of blew
the doors off of cuisine.
As El Bulli’s creative director
and head of pastry,
Albert took charge of
the restaurant’s desserts
and soon gained himself a reputation
as the world’s greatest pastry chef.
IN SPANISH:
After El Bulli closed in 2011...
..Albert opened a series of
restaurants in Barcelona...
..all of which are designed
to take the diner